so hello and welcome again to conscious
TV I'm in McNay a my guest today is
Chris page hi Chris hang in and we found
Chris quite recently he was doing a
lecture in London and I read his short
bio that came along with it the details
for the lecture and I thought what a
fascinating chap so I invited him and he
very kindly agreed to come along and
talk with us today Chris has written
three books I only have two here that
one is lifestyles a study of
reincarnation in light of contemporary
consciousness research and then this one
here dark night early dawn steps to a
deep ecology of mind and then the living
classroom teaching and collective
consciousness and then he has a new book
which isn't published yet which is going
to be called diamonds from heaven a
20-year journey into the mind of the
universe so Chris let's start with you
had these questions didn't you you've
worked for many years lecturing in
comparative religions psychology I think
to some degree and then but there's the
how you had these questions that were
burning inside you well I was trained as
a philosopher of religion and
philosophers of religion our concern
with the you know exploring the deeper
questions of existence of the meaning of
life and the structure of the universe
and the limits of human consciousness
and I had been these are the questions
I've been trained as pursue in graduate
school and then I came to my University
Youngstown State University and just as
I came there I encountered the work of
stanislav grof
and in psychedelic research and his book
realms of the human unconscious this was
78 1978
and as soon as I read that book I was so
deeply impressed with the caliber of the
of the research that he had done and the
caliber of his mind that I knew that I
wanted to do this work and the questions
you had were were questions with a
variation about consciousness what are
is what are its potentials and patterns
what are its back are its boundaries
these are slightly different from
they're not the usual who am i what am i
type questions yeah so these have been
obviously working in you for a time for
a time yeah yeah when I when I there
were two people that I met my first year
of teaching one was Ian Stevenson and
his work on reincarnation research which
opened up a whole world for me because I
had never I finished graduate school as
an atheistic Lee inclined agnostic you
know Ian Steven dopant of reincarnation
Stan opened up the opportunity to
actually experience deeper dimensions of
consciousness and by entering those
dimensions and experiencing deeper
dimensions of existence itself and that
felt like the opportunity of a lifetime
what philosopher wouldn't want to do
that yeah the problem of course is this
was 78 and they had been made illegal in
the United States the first generation
of work was over and we were 40 years
away from the Renaissance of
psychedelics that's taking place now so
I was I made a difficult choice I
decided to split my life on my public
life in my public life I became I was a
university professor I did all the
things professors do I taught and
published and served on committees but
in my private life I began a private 20
year journey in using graphs methods of
for me high dose LSD therapy 73 sessions
over 20 years I worked for four years I
stopped for six years and then I worked
very intensely for 10 years so overall
from 77 to 79 to 9
9 I did this work but because it was
illegal and because if I had because if
I had talked about this work I would
have lost my job I had to keep quiet
about it and it wasn't until after I
retired and after I was passed the
statute of limitations because I don't
do this work now that I was able to
begin to talk openly about what one can
learn about consciousness and about the
universe by following this particular
method of exploration I think the
interesting thing is you went into it as
an adventurer but you went into it in a
quite a discipline way in the organized
way and the sessions were were all laid
out I think your first wife was
supporting you in the sessions and from
what again I've learnt by talking to you
in reading is that also the sessions in
themselves were organized but not by you
and so far they were sequential and it's
like I didn't know so much about
psychedelics I know lots of people that
have been in LSD trips but it tends to
be a trip yeah and another trip and it
was for an adventure and it wasn't a
serious study and you approached it as a
serious study yeah and I think you
talked about the big difference between
doing that doing it for a recreational
purpose yeah I've never taken LSD and
gone to a concert I've never stayed up
and talking with friends like this is a
very specific methodology it's
completely internalized it's Stan
Groff's
psychedelic therapy as he describes in
his book psychedelic LSD therapy you're
totally isolated you're cut off from the
world you're you're in a private space
you're lying down you're wearing eye
shades you're listening to very
carefully selected music my first wife
was was and is a clinical psychologist
and she was my sitter and
you take the medicine and then you
completely surrender and let it take you
where it will take you and I did this
work in contrast to current research
with the Renaissance of psychedelic
research which is very focused on
healing agenda it which is important
work very important a much smaller doses
as well as much lower doses very low and
gentler substances I did this work as a
philosopher I wanted to explore the deep
structure of consciousness that Stan had
shown in his early work and the
structure of the universe itself and I
found that if you if you are willing to
submit to this intense destructuring of
consciousness you go through not just
one death and rebirth
but over time you go through a series of
deaths and rebirths and deaths and
rebirth that take you deeper and deeper
and deeper into what do we call it the
mind of the universe the mind of the
cosmos the man's alive and in my
experience I never controlled what was
happening in the sessions I would try to
set intentions but it working at levels
this high which I don't recommend I mean
I really because it was 500 600 I was
working at five to six hundred
micrograms yes yeah which now that I'm
through it and looking back I really
don't recommend working in a sustained
manner with levels at high would be much
gentler than myself if I were doing it
again
but at the time I didn't you know I was
young and I took good care of myself I
really very good care and everything was
very methodical I kept detailed records
within 24 hours of every session making
a complete phenomenological record
keeping track of all the variables of
all the dates and then and I studied the
sessions over years because these are
complex experiences what I found was
that if you open yourself deeply
you enter into a conversation with the
universe and the universe is interested
in deepening your experience of it and
so the universe takes you in and teaches
you and and trains you and and softens
what needs to be softened breaks what
needs to be broken in order to allow you
to entered more and more intimately into
the deep structure of reality but you
see doesn't it take a certain courage
from you as a human being
to allow that to happen because you've
got no idea where it really leads yeah
it does and this is one of the great
gifts at Stan Grof gave me in reading
his work one of the deep gifts I he gave
me was to trust the process
if you submit to it if you let it take
you where it will take you no matter how
terrible it becomes no matter how
inscrutable the process if you surrender
to it it will always culminate it will
take you to a breaking point and then it
will catch you you it you will die and
then you will awaken into a different
condition a different reality as a
different being in a different dimension
of existence Oh what do you mean that
you will die what would it actually mean
in a tangible way
in order to experience intimately the
the deep nature of reality you can't
take your ego into that reality and have
a transpersonal experience the only way
to have these to enter into these
realities is to become a citizen of
those realities and our time-space
identity just by the conditioning of
time and space is keeps us small and in
order to enter into X vast expanses of
reality we have to let go of that which
keeps us small so literally you go
through a psychological death in the ego
death it's very common and so ego death
so it's a death of a construction of who
we think we are yeah who we become
through our conditioning yeah so I I was
a white male highly educated philosopher
concerned with the meaning of existence
the universe broke me by turning into
the exact opposite of all of those it it
for hours and hours I experienced being
female being poor being women of color
and being women who had no interest in
philosophy whatsoever which is perfectly
fine accepted it completely negated my
sense of who I was and when I finally
yielded and let it let that happen and
it allowed myself to become a woman
it took me in the most marvelous
experience of hundreds and hundreds of
women's lives teach showing me just
giving me the experience of being
feminine that I wish every man had the
opportunity to experience women as
deeply as it gave it to me and when you
say you yeah
during these adventures that's cool and
what is the you because if the ego is
dissolved what is the new that's having
this experience yeah that's that's one
of the linguistic puzzles that kind of
every mystic also always has to address
that I is not this I but it is
continuous with this I but it's not this
I and so
the first death is the death of ego
there is continuity of awareness there's
Conte there's continuity of a memory but
discontinuity of capacity so when you
die and wake up in a different reality
you you remember who you are but you are
not who you were when you were a human a
time-space human being you you literally
have become a different kind of being
for six to eight hours at a time I
wasn't I mean Chris base gets shattered
and you literally learn how to be a
different kind of being and then once
you stabilize consciousness at this post
egoic level and you go through various
purification and transformative
processes eventually if you keep pushing
keep going deeper it will ask you to
surrender even more deeply and it will
you have to give up something more
fundamental than your personal identity
and when you do and you wake up into
that next reality you're not chris beige
you're not even who you died how Chris
beige died into you are a different
entity when you come back there is a
thread of a memory but you are literally
remembering having been different beings
or different dimensions of being you see
so it's the transformation happening
within the trip or is it happening after
you come back or is it back it's both
it's it's certainly both and you know
there's a lot of discussion of
psychedelics and enlightenment and death
psychedelics lead to enlightenment and
what's the relationship and is it
counterproductive is it productive and
and these adventures were not aimed at
enlightenment I mean they started that
way the I started because I was
interested in enlightenment and I
thought I could do these sessions and
ego would die and I would get to
enlightenment faster but that turned out
it changed very quickly because after I
went through my first egodeath instead
of personal transformation the story
opened up into a story of deep
Collective transformation I began to
enter into what I call the ocean of
suffering where I began to enter into
what the Buddhists would call the hell
realms just the the deep deep suffering
that still lives within the collective
psyche and this went on for two years
and so many sessions and so many years
involved so many people that it
eventually shattered my perception of
what was going on it
it wasn't aimed at my personal
transformation it was aimed at the
transformation of some aspect of the
collective unconscious of humanity and
then after that after I went through
that and after that culminated I entered
into archetypal reality and when I
entered into archetypal reality I went
through a phase where I had to cease to
be a human being and I discovered that
there there is a human identity which is
deeper than your individual human
identity and just as I had had to die as
Chris Bosh in order to become something
larger I had to die as a human being per
se I had to go completely outside any
reframe of reference of humanity to move
into bestest I could determine it was
archetypal reality different dimensions
of archetypal reality and it and each of
those every step deeper is a step into a
much more intense modality of energy so
every step deeper is a step into a very
very intense energy field so intense
that in the beginning it can be
shattering and very hard to maintain
coherent awareness but I found that if
if I went back again and I went back
again over a year I went back again
systematically about five times a year
that you go through a purification
process and a clarification process that
you're you learn how to stay conscious
in levels of reality that at the
beginning you could not stay conscious
in that you have to practice yeah I
think to give it some context you did 73
trips
yeah over 20 years I would never say
trips good so what you would use the
word Hashem's 73 sessions over 20 years
yeah and then each session no matter how
long the gap was sequential yeah so what
would happen is that the end of one
session the next session you would start
where you left off the previous one
approximately there's you know sometimes
you have to sort of see the whole
sequence before you understand the logic
of the flow yeah it wasn't it was kind
of like a keeping a dream journal it
it's there is a logical flow that you
can identify but sometimes you have to
kind of go several layers down before
you can see the overarching story yeah
yes no I understand yeah and and you you
had you took the time in between to kind
of to integrate absorb what had happened
and also you at you were saying last
night when we had dinner that there also
your body had to not as if it was
recovering as such now but the body was
adapting because the energy you're in
yeah when you're in the session it's
such a powerful energy and you know
you've got this you've got the absolute
coming in to some finite vessel which
has to be able to accommodate that
energy and that that was that was quite
a big thing wasn't it huge yeah because
every step deeper is more intense and
you when you go into these states you
open up into vast fields of
consciousness and the energy is just
huge and it's running through your
system and you have to prepare your body
to go into that states and then after
your system shrinks down after the
session you have to then continue to
work with your body to help it absorb
the the experiences health in a healthy
manner you really have to stay clean in
your in your heart habits and in your
meditation and your in your yoga
practice and in all the structural
aspects of your body and I I found out
my system had kind of a natural capacity
to let go and I never had any trouble
coming back and there was a natural
congealing but you have to monitor your
system very carefully throughout and I
would have a session I would write it
all up and I would have two or three
months to think about it absorb it to
ponder it follow its teachings because
it gives you teachings yes and then I
would open up again and the process
would repeat itself in this manner
because you also talked about those
layers of conditioning yeah that you're
letting go of yeah and it's not like you
are saying I'm letting go yeah in the
sessions the letting go is happening
yeah because you're you there's an
allowance there yeah
I surrender it to the universe or this
creative intelligence takes me in
usually what happens in a session is the
first half of the session is spent in
some form of intense purification and
then it reaches a peak and you're drawn
then into the second half of the session
which is some type of ecstatic
experience some deeper immersion into
the divine and then a series of
teachings and then the system slowly
closes down and do you remember all
those teachers when you come back I do
Wow now it have to qualify that just a
little bit
many layers and you go through this
death rebirth cycle death rebirth and if
you if you stop there you stay at that
level but if you keep pushing and
driving in it that's one of the things I
found about the high dose LSD work it's
just huge power it keeps pushing you to
your edges to your outer limits when you
break into a new level when you first
break into a new level it's a different
system different rules
it works by a different process and when
you first break through often recall is
hard and you mate you get pieces you get
aspects but they don't always go here in
a way that makes sense to you so your
your account will have sessions I will
have gaps but if you go back again and
you go back again and you go back again
you train yourself how to stay conscious
in that level of reality you go through
purification and more purification and
eventually you're able to maintain
coherent cognition at that level of
reality at that point the pieces begin
to cohere you get a more coherent map of
what's going on you get a clearer
stabilized vision and this is one of the
differences between therapeutic work and
tripping it if you trip you may touch
these places you know here there but if
you want to have sustained conscious
experience at various levels of reality
you have to pay your dues and you have
to work to be conscious at that level
when you do that you come back I am able
to bring it all back and when I write my
account I found that I there's a
technique I used which was the day after
a session you're kind of a porous I
would play the music that was used in
the session in exactly the same order in
which it was played and I would write
the session up listening to the music
that I had used in the session so it
would kind of put me one foot in one
foot out and I would I could get back
into the space and it would help me
remember and help me remember and I
would get it down in print always and
pushing it but with work with careful
attention
in the session and afterwards you can
retain it I think one of the things that
I particularly liked when I would know
it was it I was think it was in the The
Dark Knight book was that you you you
kind of you've stressed that you cannot
waken fully awakened individually
because you had the realization you know
that at the absolute level which you
were you you you were visiting certainly
certainly part of the time but it is all
one so when you come back to the human
vessel
it makes thee it makes a real myth that
someone can awaken individually yeah
when the next person isn't fully awake
how can that be that an individual
awakes yeah another individual doesn't
awake yeah you know the the metaphor
that I like to use when I'm teaching
this with my students is the metaphor of
the leaf leaves and the tree's leaves if
you imagine leaves being individually
conscious and yet they are
manifestations of the consciousness of
the treats of both and so we are both
individually conscious and there is a
story of the individual evolution but if
you really kind of dig deep and you ask
well what is an individual then you
encounter these kind of the collective
psyche you know the consciousness of the
planet the consciousness of the galaxy
and from and then deeper into as you say
the absolute what I call my beloved
meanness in it
individual awakening is really kind of
it's a it's just a mistaken inference
it's true that if you don't if you don't
work individually you don't make
progress and yet when you make progress
you are actually drawing into your work
I think you would touch the
consciousness of many people and many
people's consciousness are represented
in your work so it's impossible to put a
boundary on Awakening and the universe
doesn't in this sense doesn't even think
in terms of individuals I mean it does
but it also thinks in terms it's
interested in awakening the entire
species it's not interested in awakening
this religion and that religion or this
planet this this continent that
continent
it's interested in taking the whole of
the human family into its evolutionary
progression and that's so that's I began
to realize I wasn't doing these sessions
for my personal work I wasn't doing it
to you know for my personal healing or
my personal transformation yeah it
started with the questions but the
adventure that you far beyond
yeah those initial questions yeah and
then beyond even Collective
transformation it just became an
adventure in knowing the universe just
an adventure in being drawn deep into
intimacy with the creative intelligence
and drawn into causal reality into
oneness into Shunyata emptiness and into
the fertile void into the satchitananda
you know the existence before existence
just one adventure after another deeper
and deeper and there I have an acute
sense of that the universe loves to be
known I mean the universe wants to be
known so any part we are the universe
with we are part of it's snowing and
when we when we return to source when we
begin that journey back to
point of origin we are met with the what
do you call it again it's we are met by
this massive supreme intelligence this
extraordinary compassion and loving
beyond imagination and it's so happy
that part of it has come back to
experience it and to know it and it
wants to show you creation it wants to
show you what has been going on because
we're it's been working for billions and
billions and billions of years and we
are just getting to where in the last
few thousand years we can begin to open
up deeply enough to consciously
participate and to see the creative
process and it's so happy when we do
that and do you have a view on so your
your adventure took you to these this
knowledge this experience and yet
there's other people that go the path of
contemplation and meditation so they
have very similar experiences yeah the
deep do you feel that your way was
slightly different I know in terms of
substance it was but do you feel that
realizations and the knowledge of your
way was that different from from the way
of contemplation and meditation no I
think that not the cosmology that came
out of this work is not different than
the cosmology that you see in the great
contemplative traditions the great
spiritual traditions you know all honor
to the great masters who have done this
under the very power of their own daily
practice means and I taught courses in
mysticism and meditation and the great
spiritual sages were always my teachers
and always my masters and they kept me
but what they described and what I
experienced seemed to fit hand in glove
hmm so I don't there's nothing new there
the only thing new is that we have a
different method who could let them
someone of modest spiritual capacity
if they have sufficient determination
and courage just to submit to the
regimen even someone of modest spiritual
capacity like me might have temporary
experience of these things now as
Houston Smith said a mystical experience
does not a mystic make you know so you
can't take these experiences in and use
them to maintain but that consciousness
permanently it would be so good if you
could but by going back and forth and
back and forth and doing the practice
you're doing your work in the daily way
hopefully more and more of it
internalizes itself in your being and
and you grow you grow yeah I think one
of the interesting thing was that you
midway through through this adventure
you wrote this book yes the the living
classroom yeah which was about the about
what was happening with you with your
students yeah and you don't mention
psychedelia - yeah secretary experiments
at all in this yeah and yet something
very special what's happening between
you and your students yeah do you want
to talk briefly about Lawrence I wrote
living classroom towards the end of my
teaching career and and I don't mention
psychedelics at all because it's not
about counting psychedelics it's about
consciousness but the backstory to it is
I was teaching and I was doing my
private work and I never talked about my
psychedelic experiences to my students I
never you know I just kept a firewall
between my professional life and my
personal work but what I found over time
was that my students were being
activated by my private work that when I
would go into deeper states of
consciousness or go through some death
rebirth process they were spontaneously
being activated in their own life in
ways that I began to recognize were
parallel to what was happening in my
and another thing began to happen when I
was lecturing on something and I would
just need an example to make a point
about and I would just pause and wait
and I would think of an example and I
would use the example and students began
to come up to me after class and they
began to say you know it's funny that
you used that example because that's
exactly what happened to me this week
and first this happened I thought well
okay coincidence but it kept happening
it kept happening and the deeper I went
in my work
these synchronicities began to touch
very very deep pieces of their life and
it was like there was a radar operating
that was connecting me to where they
were hurt what they needed to hear the
the some healing that they needed some
idea that they needed and when they
would hear them their life being
suddenly in the room they could not help
but get involved deeply and when I began
to see that this was happening pretty
regularly
I began to realize I have to understand
this I I have to not only do I have to
understand it but I have to figure out
how as an educator how to work with it
do I need to protect them from what's
happening do I need to build barriers or
how can i how can I be myself and teach
in a way that's safe for them and yet
also allows me to just be Who I am what
I am and that's what the living
classroom is about it's about
consciousness in its natural condition
is boundless and endless and doesn't
have firm membranes and edges there is a
private consciousness of a sort but in
its end consciousness is like a lake you
throw in a stone the ripples spread out
and so I developed a strategy a set of
strategies for how to work with
consciousness in the context of rooms of
people groups of people and I also found
out that there there is a field energy
I mean I'd read Rupert Sheldrake and his
work in morphic deals but I had always
thought of morphic fields in terms of
species whole species but what I found
is that there are feels that congeal
around courses there feels that congeal
around students in a room and if you
teach the same course year after year
after year there's a feel that congeals
and get stronger that reflects the
learning of all the students who have
taken that course with you and that
field accelerates the student the
learning of students who take the course
five or ten years down the road and and
so once you know that that's happening
you can begin to work cooperatively
strategically with those fields so
there's just it's a whole different
modality of pedagogy you might call it
instead of a newtonian pedagogy it's a
quantum pedagogy so for example I found
it's important to close those fields at
the end of the course so if you open the
room into kind of the collective energy
of these fields students get very deeply
touched I mean they get deeply activated
but at the end of the course I found
that I found that students were kind of
showing up in my office after a course
was over and they just kind of wanted to
talk or and at first I thought oh that's
nice
they had a good course but then I began
to realize now something's wrong they
were caught they were still stuck they
were still connected to the field but
they didn't have any place to take it so
I began to realize not only do you open
these reveals and work with them
skillfully
you have to close them skillfully so you
have to go through a process both
socially in the room and sort of
shamanic lis and spiritual practice to
close the fields
because you don't want to encourage that
type of dependence I want my students to
be independent I want them to take the
learning go to their next course
integrate what their next professor has
to share on their own field and find
their own and I want them to free in the
world and so it's just lots of you know
there was a lot of learning I think
there was one interesting example you
used in the living classroom about how
you found that when a student would ask
you a question if you didn't reply
straight away you just were open for a
few seconds you'd see like this door
open yeah and a whole new dimension to
the answer to the question would come
yeah
well it's like I found if I stopped and
instead of saying the first thing that
came to my mind cuz you know pretty much
every question they ask is something
you've already heard before but if I
stopped the I visual it's suddenly I saw
a little blank a door in the back of my
mind and a piece of paper came through
the door and I read the paper and it was
a different answer and so when if I if I
tried it all of a sudden they the eyes
would light up and the energy of the
room would light up and we would we
would go in a new and novel direction
and and so my teaching began to be a
dialogue between organized I organized
how to do a lot of notes and really
thoroughly organized but then this
improvisation and my understanding is
the improvisation that was coming
through this deeper consciousness
connection was what happened when my
mind was put into the context of our
collective mind and the teaching came
out of a dialogue between the minds who
were there and my mind who was there and
you also talked about how the students
were changing you oh yeah yeah felt that
and he talked about there's a quote from
the book over the years the students
broke me down and rebuilt me yeah
that's quite radical to say these
students broke you down and rebuilt you
yeah
I've always was always blessed with
really good students they they were
willing to engage deeply the questions
that I asked and we danced we danced
together and in that process they they
opened up my heart they they invited me
into the room and they let me into their
lives you know not in a counseling kind
of way but in an intellectual and in a
philosophical inquiry kind of way and we
work together and in that process they
taught me about this hidden territory in
the room they taught me what could
happen when good people of good hearts
came together in this adventure and and
they did they broke me down I learned
for example at first I thought you know
I would a student would ask a question
and I would have an answer only because
of an experience that had recently
happened to me our book I just recently
read our session I just had and I
thought oh that's interesting I do the
work and suddenly the universe has this
capacity to use my knowledge to seed
knowledge in somebody else's life and
then I began to realize they had it all
backwards that sometimes I was having
the experiences I was having and reading
the books that I was having was reading
because there was a questioning student
who was coming to me in the future so
that my learning was actually being
seeded by their desire to know and once
you let go at that level once you stop
thinking that you were the orchestrator
of this entire enterprise that it's
really a collaborative enterprise right
from the start then and you realize that
your learning and teaching is so deeply
embedded in their learning and teaching
then there is a self in that you know
where are the boundaries of the self you
know it just becomes a dance of
presences in the room and and when life
uses you in that way when life
kind of uses you in that delicious way
to when that cross fertilization takes
place it's the sweetest feeling in the
world to me you know you're just part of
something larger
are you released to it and they relief
and they release to it and they took me
there I could not I could not go there
by myself they took me there and then at
some point a great sadness came upon you
on your adventure talk about yeah as
years past you found yourself entering a
deep sadness your enthusiasm for life
was fading you began to feel separated
and marooned reached the point when you
realize he was just waiting to die to
return to your beloved yeah that was
after I stopped the journey yes so I
have to kind of fill in a little bit of
a blank and then I can say what happened
after the burning in the book I tell the
story and diamonds from heaven I tell
the story of ego death moving into the
ocean of suffering and then moving into
archetypal reality and and then moving
into causal reality and it's having
these wonderful unitive experiences and
and I I was completely satisfied at that
point I mean you know to merge so deeply
but there were still five years in the
journey ahead and what happened is I
went through yet another cycle of death
and rebirth and I was taken into a
domain of light that was so clear so
exquisitely just clear clear beyond
imagination
Buddhism calls it dharmakaya the
absolute reality of clear light and over
five years and 26 sessions I was taken
into this reality four times just four
times and in between those four sessions
there was tremendous purification you
know and and so it was you literally in
these states of awareness you become
light you just dissolve completely into
light and you and you have the qualities
of light and the boundlessness of light
and the you just dissolved in the into
the crystalline nature of the divine now
I don't mean divine in any theistic
sense or in any conventional sense but I
don't know how else does what other
vocabulary to give to it in each of
those four adventures going deeper into
the divine there were a series of things
that happened and then the divine began
to come deeper into my body but then I
reached a point after being handled very
carefully and broken down but handled
carefully and then this consciousness
camp brought me to the end of my work it
just it brought me to the end it gave me
a an overview of all of my sessions from
the beginning to the end to show me the
whole pattern to put all the pieces
together and then it gave me a last set
of instructions as I was about to leave
I didn't know it was over but it called
it and so I knew I knew I had to stop my
work and and the primary reason I
stopped the work was because it became
too difficult to come back from the
light it became so painful to come back
into time and space
after having dissolved so completely
into this infinite white and okay I want
light comes in many many little it comes
in early on it it has layers and layers
and layers but the diamond light is what
I call the diamond light is a
particularly it's a particular advanced
form of the light it's a very very deep
expression of light so I stopped my
sessions and I had always been
integrating my sessions carefully all
the way through but what I found was
when I stopped my sessions and I thought
I would now because I had done this work
carefully I would be able to just enjoy
the fruits of that labor but what I
found over time is that a deep sadness
settled in over me and over time I began
to realize I was suffering from a loss
of communion I I just there was such a
longing for that light and I could I did
not have the spiritual maturity or the
spiritual capacity to incarnate that
light in my physical existence and I've
reached a point where I began to realize
I I was just waiting to die I was taking
care of my students taking care of my
family I was doing the things that I
would do but in my heart of hearts I was
waiting to die so I could return to the
light and I began over the years I began
to realize that this is not right this
is not the way it's supposed to go
somewhere along the way I made a mistake
I must have made a mistake because this
is not the way it's supposed to be so I
really went back and re-examined the
whole process and I began to realize
that you could say I was suffering from
too much God but since the physical
universe is a man is the the divine as
well I'd say I had lost balance a
balance between transcendence and
imminence I had plunged so deeply into
the transcendent divine that I lost my
foothold my place in the imminent divine
and that's that's
incredibly valuable the eminent divine
is so valuable SOI I had to make a
concerted effort to congeal my life and
to come to terms with being where I was
as I was and to continue the process of
doing my spiritual practice so that I
could let the divine the the light enter
more deeply into my body and into my
consciousness so it's a it's an ongoing
process I mean it's it's a work still in
process yes but you you you say talk
about in the book the but was not
published yet
yeah Diamond Thomas from heaven yeah the
it's the fact the human things like the
family yeah it was so important to you
oh yeah in helping you sort of refine
the ground
yeah and finally pleasure again in human
things yeah because yes you were almost
blown away that what was there but
there's so much beauty also in a human
realms that somehow they're these are my
words rather than yours which been taken
out of significance but in themselves
they're wonderful absolutely I mean my
family was always the my my rock my
students and my family I have three
children and and just always coming back
wherever I was on Saturday Monday I was
with my classes and I was always with my
children like these flowers on the table
what magnificent expressions of creation
there are and the the diamond luminosity
the light is magnificent we have a huge
tremendous hunger to touch these realms
and return to them but the physical
world is the manifestation of that
reality in tangible form and so Nature
has been a tremendous balm for me it
just just nature the starry sky being in
the woods being in nature being with
people this is another aspect of that
sadness the sadness wasn't just loss of
communion the other installation you
the sadness is in our culture I wasn't
allowed to talk about these things you
know in traditional culture you bring
your visions back to the elders who help
you understand them and because your
visions were are not meant for you
they're always collective but in my
culture I wasn't allowed to talk about
my sessions I couldn't bring these
visions back I couldn't teach from them
I couldn't share them with my colleagues
and that sickness of silence just added
to my sadness it just isolated me and it
makes you sick inside living in a
psychedelic closet is just as injurious
that's living in any other closet where
you have to deny yourself in order to
live in your culture writing diamonds
from heaven was really my step back to
the world and sharing these visions
doing what I was designed to do to be a
teacher I find I share just to just
bring them forward just to let hopefully
they'll be of use to people hopefully
they'll find them helpful since some way
and to be able to begin to share them to
bring them back to be able to speak
without reservation of about my
experiences and and it's my experiences
are not important in that what's
important is all of our experiences I
mean I what's important is that all of
our experiences of the transcendent
reality or these realities be put on the
table we look at them together and we
find out what's important what's not
important so I don't have any attachment
to my I don't own these experiences yeah
but it took you you you you you says you
also seen in him on the books that at
the end of the 20 years yeah you were
told or you felt it would take 20 years
of integration yeah and actually the 20
years is up next year it's getting close
yeah yeah 20 life yeah at first when
after I done the sessions and when my
meditation spirit told me 20 years in 20
years old they would take 20 years to
absorb them
now I'm coming close to those 20 years
that I'm thinking that might have been
optimistic because these things are so
deep if sometimes it feels like it will
take many lifetimes to absorb them and
that really rate I have really basic
questions how do you experience how do
you integrate infinity into finite
structures yeah
you know some of my experiences involved
going far into deep to what I call deep
time outside of time and space deep into
the future deep into different
dimensions of time how do you integrate
those breaths of time into Monday
Tuesday Wednesday consciousness you know
and in the end where I am now I don't
think you can the only thing we can do
is integrate our finite existence into
the infinite so we do our practice we
surrender which we make ourselves
available we do everything we can to
respond to the needs of the present and
if we do that consistently hopefully
then the infinite becomes a deeper and
deeper living reality in our conscious
awareness yes and again I was saying to
last night that it's not so much just
the experiences you had which are
amazing experiences I find for myself it
just I get to understand something or
have an experience or had a realization
and it can take me years to properly
integrate that yeah I realize it's still
hanging around in a form that yeah isn't
totally something I can absorb and I
just think I just feel more and more on
there a kind of a spiritual journey
people often give themselves too much of
a hard time yeah if they think well yeah
I kind of got that I must move on and
now I must get something else or I
shouldn't be clear you know you do your
best but you know as you found out it's
a process it takes time you cannot force
these things you can be available you
can do the you can do the meditation and
there look after yourself and there many
other supportive work
in the same time it does it's it's a
slow and gradual process you you can't
cheat nature it takes time you can kind
of push it but in the end you have to
let nature take its course
yes yeah okay Chris I'm looking at the
clock and nature's taking its course and
yeah time needs better thank you up
thank you so much Ian it's so good to
have this conversation with you thank
you for it thank you for coming along to
conscious TV and I'm gonna mention your
new book which should be out sometime
next year next year something diamonds
from heaven a 20-year journey into the
mind of the universe and then the three
books already out dark night early dawn
living classroom which we touched on
about halfway through the interview
about Chris's teaching and the first
book which I have naturally like
Michael's life cycles a study of
reincarnation in light of contemporary
consciousness research so if you're
interested in Chris there's a lot to
read there's also I think on your you've
got a website yet but there is an option
there is um a lecture you did in in
Prague yes is about an hour long which I
found very useful for picking up the
details of Chris's psychedelic
adventuring international transpersonal
conference last September in Prague
right yeah okay yeah so there lots of
fun I think I'd like to explore this
more on conscious TV so if you've got
the ideas of people that we should look
at interviewing them then get in contact
you bet okay thanks again Chris Thank
You Ian thank you for watching and I
hope we see you again soon goodbye
you